# Operating systems

Personal computers are **single user** devices for general purposes. While the
perfomance of a modern personal computer can surpass the old supercomputers,
they are not aiming for the maximum perfomance. The operating system is rather
orientated more towards software compatibility,  usability, entertaining,
office work,  mobility, etc.. At this moment more than $77 \%$ of personal
computers use Windows, while around  $17 \%$ are running maSOs (Apple
proprietary operating systems). The rest of the devices use ChromeOs or some
version of Linux or Unix.

**Supercomputers** are focused on performing intensive number crunching,
mainly for scientific purpose.  For  couples of years  all supercomputers
which are making it to Top 500 use Linux.  Linux OS has many advantages over
Windows. Unlike Windows and macOS, Linux is modular and build around a kernel
which contains the basic system and drivers. The users now can add to the
kernel various modules to serve purpose of the device (focused on user
interface or server management). It is generic in the sense that the
kernel is written in a such a way it can run on any device, from hand-held
gadgets to large supercomputers. It has very good scalability, Linux can
handle efficiently small and large loads. In the case of supercomputer we
expect the system to handle hundreds or thousands of users conencted in the
same time. It is free and open source. All the undelying code is known and
users can modify and improve it. There is a large community which is dedicated
to Linux. When problems arise they are very fast handled. Finally, the cost is
big factor. A supercomputer is a collection of computing nodes linked togheter
and using a proprietary OS would mean a licences fee paid for each indvidual
node.
